<style>
    .center {
        display: flex;
        justify-content: center;
    }

    .leftTable {
    display: block;
    margin-left: 0px;
    margin-right: auto;
    width: 40%;
    }

    .leftTable th {
    background: rgba(0,0,0,0.2);
    }
</style>


# Formal Languages — CSE 4083 & CSE 5210

Grant Butler, CSE4083 Spring 2022, Computer Science B.S.

<div style="page-break-after: always; break-after: page;"></div>

## 1 Deterministic Finite Automata


1. <a id="1"></a> Consider a DFA $M=(Q, Σ, δ, s, f)$ with States $Q ={s, q_1, q_2, f}$ where _s_ is the start and _f_ is the final state; </br>
Alphabet $Σ = {0,1}$ and transition function _δ_.

Construct a state transition table for _δ_ (or you can draw a state transition diagram) that recognizes regular expressions that are binary strings and multiples of 3, for example, the strings:

<div class="center">
$0, 11, 110, 1001, 1100, ...$
</div>

would be accepted strings, but

<div class="center">
$1, 10, 100, 101, ...$
</div>

would not be accepted.

><sub>
\*Hint: Think, if $n = 3k$ is a multiple of 3, then the next multiple of 3 is $3k + 3$. </br>
This could be accomplished by a transition from the current state to a next state by scanning 3 ones.
</sub>

<div style="page-break-after: always; break-after: page;"></div>


## 2 Nondeterministic Finite Automata

2. <a id="2"></a> Explain how any NFA (with λ (or ∈) transitions) can be converted into a DFA that accepts the same language as that accepted by the NFA. That is, the expressive power of NFAs and DFAs are equivalent.  This is known as the Rabin-Scott Theorem




## 3 Regular Expressions in the Programming World

3. <a id="3"></a> Consider a programming language that has identifiers that start with a lowercase ASCII letter

<div class="center">
$A=\{a..z\}$
</div>

followed by a string of 1 or more digits

<div class="center">
$D=\{0..9\}$
</div>

or 1 or more lowercase ASCII letters. Show how to write this specification as a regular expression.



## 4 Closure Properties of Languages

Answer these $True$ (T) or $False$ (F) questions. Give a brief explanation of your answer

><sub>
\*(for example, explain how to construct a machine that implements the property.)
</sub>

4. <a id="4"></a> Regular languages are closed under intersection.

5. <a id="5"></a> Regular languages are closed under Kleene-star.


## 5 Decision Properties of Languages

6. <a id="6"></a> What does it mean to say that a “yes” or “no” question is _undecidable_?

<div style="page-break-after: always; break-after: page;"></div>

##### $True$ (T) or $False$ (F):
- - -

7. <a id="7"></a> It is decidable whether or not the language of a DFA is empty or non-empty. Give an explanation of your answer.


8. <a id="8"></a> It is decidable whether or not the language of a DFA is finite or infinite.


9. <a id="9"></a> It  is  undecidable  whether  or  not  the  a  strings is  accepted  by  a  DFA.


10. <a id="10"></a> It is decidable whether or not two regular languages $L_1$ and $L_2$ are equal. Give an explanation of your answer.

- - -

<div style="page-break-after: always; break-after: page;"></div>

## 6 Equivalence Relations

11. <a id="11"></a> On the set ℕ of natural numbers define an equivalence relation $n\equiv m$ if and only if

<div class="center">
$n\mod3=m\mod3$
</div>

><sub>\*Hint: Recall any natural number n can be written as $n= 3q+r$ n with quotient q and remainder r. </br>
And **$n\mod 3 =\{kr:k∈ℕ\}$** The set of all natural numbers that have a remainder of r when divided by 3.
</sub>

Prove that $\equiv$ is an equivalence relation on the set of natural numbers.


<div style="page-break-after: always; break-after: page;"></div>

## 7 The Pumping Lemma for Regular Languages

12. <a id="12"></a> DFAs can't count to an arbitrary natural number! Use the pumping lemma for regular languages to show that language

<div class="center">
$EQ=\{w ∈ {\{a, b\}*} : w = a^i b^i \}$
</div>

is not regular. Here the number of _a's_ in the prefix of _w_ equals the number of _b's_ in the suffix of _w_.


<div style="page-break-after: always; break-after: page;"></div>

## 8 Context Free Languages

13. <a id="13"></a> Consider the CFG G defined by the productions:

<div class="center">
$S \rightarrow aS|Sb|a|b$
</div>

Prove by induction that no string in $L(G)$ has $ba$ as a sub-string.

><sub>
Hint: To show this do induction on the length of the strings.
</sub>


14. <a id="14"></a> Give simple English language descriptions for the strings generated by the</br>
productions following four grammars $(G = (V, T, P, S) )$:

    1. $G_1 \rightarrow S|aS|a$


    2. $G_2 : S!aSa|aa|a$


    3. $G_3 : S|SaS|a$

<div style="page-break-after: always; break-after: page;"></div>

<div class="leftTable">
| Question              | Points | Score  |
| ------------------    | ------ | ------ |
| [1](#1)               |   10   |        |
| [2](#2)               |   15   |        |
| [3](#3)               |   10   |        |
| [4](#4)               |   5    |        |
| [5](#5)               |   5    |        |
| [6](#6)               |   5    |        |
| [7](#7)               |   5    |        |
| [8](#8)               |   5    |        |
| [9](#9)               |   5    |        |
| [10](#10)             |   5    |        |
| [11](#11)             |   10   |        |
| [12](#12)             |   10   |        |
| [13](#13)             |   5    |        |
| [14](#14)             |   5    |        |
| Total:                |   100  |        |
</div>
